Pull out the outline you got.
Here's what I want us to talk about.
We're in a series, we're talking about hope, the panic, what is it that makes us anxious, worried and afraid.
And there's one thing above everything else, statistically they tell us that freaks us out.
It's money.
Most of us here, at one time or another, maybe even today, we get stressed out about money.
That feeling of walking in, looking on the counter and seeing an envelope with a big red sticker that says final notice.
You know, and that immediately makes you feel bad about not being able to keep up with your commitments.
It's the final notice.
So that means what's going to happen if you don't or aren't able to pay it.
It's just a horrible, horrible feeling having to call.
the billing office at the hospital or at your physician and figure out how to make payments because you're unable to pay off the doctor's visit for one of your kids.
It's embarrassing.
It's challenging.
It's stressful.
It makes us anxious.
Now, we all deal with money in different ways.
Some of us are spenders.
How many of you are a spender if you're honest, you're a spender?
Okay.
How many of you are sitting next to a spender who lied and didn't raise their hand?
How many of you are savers?
Right?
Yes, yes.
They have no problem at all raising their hand.
Proud of you.
How many of you are hoarders?
You buy and hang on to it.
How many of you are a pushover for a salesman?
Anybody?
I am.
Okay, I am a pushover.
You know when you go to the mall and you have those people that are trying to sell you an electric shock, that little pad to make you feel better or your fingernails or something for your teeth, Stephanie always has to walk in between me and them.
Because I'll stop and then they've got you, right?
Once you stop and then it's like, here, let's put that on your hand and oh, doesn't it look better?
And I can't see a difference, but I go, yeah, it really looks different, you know?
Put that things on your eyes, don't you?
The wrinkles are gone.
Yeah, they are, you know.
And so, it's stuff that's me go to the mall by myself.
I come home with all kinds of weird things that they're selling in those little deals.
I'm a pushover sometimes.
That's why, you know, here at the church,
We have, we want to be good stewards of the resources that God gives us.
And so we have an incredible team, Pastor Matt, as an MBA leads out on that team.
Of course, we have an accountant on that team, Certified Accountant.
And then we get audited every year by a very reputable accounting service, outside accounting service, because we want to be good stewards.
I want to, because it's difficult to evaluate ourselves, I want us to take a little quiz, a little financial quiz, and here's where you can find it.
Pull out your phone, and it's on our app, all right?
Pull out your phone.
Most of you were already texting, emailing, but go to potential church app.
We have an iOS and an Android, and if you haven't downloaded it already, disk, disk, disk, okay?
And if you look right on the front page, you're going to find this financial quiz, which is going to help you evaluate whether you're a spender or a saver, not just your opinion, but how you answer just four questions, okay?
Now, if you don't have a phone, you got a flip phone, okay, and you don't have internet service, then we're going to put it up here on the screen.
You can go old school paper and pencil and write it down.
You'll have to add it up at the end.
The app does that all by itself.
So let's go to the question number one.
You're at the mall and you see a shirt that you like.
What do you do?
Pull out your wallet, buy it.
Decide not to buy the shirt.
I mean, after all, you have enough clothes.
C, you forget about the shirt.
Try to think about something else or D, buy the shirt and then feel like crap the rest of the day because you bought it.
You feel guilty.
Question number two.
You get an inheritance from a family member.
How do you spend it?
A, you spend it in three months.
It's gone.
You invest some, save some, and then have some for a rainy day.
You ask your friends what they think you should do, or you leave the check on cash because there's no way in the world any of your relatives left you money.
It must be a mistake.
Number three, your boss rewards you with a significant bonus for a job well done.
What do you do?
Search on the web for that dream car you've been thinking about.
Thank your boss and put it in the money market or CD or something.
Deposit the bonus and you'll figure it out later.
Be grateful for the bonus, but wonder if it's enough to cover all your debt.
And then the last question, a friend asked tomorrow money.
What do you do?
Give them the money.
After all, they're your friend, right?
You should give it to them, or B, agree to lend the money, but you set up a payment plan so that you can be repaid in a timely manner.
You give them the 20 bucks, but then you're like, here are a payback plan for 10 monthly payments of only $10 or $2 or whatever.
C, you say no before they even get it out of their mouth, or D, you lie.
And you say, I'd love to give you the loan, but I don't have the money.
Which one of those?
Like I said, on the app, it will immediately give you the key and tell you the answers.
If you did old school paper, add up how many A's, how many B's, how many C's do you have, and here's the key.
If you have two or more A's, you're a spender.
If you have B's, you're a saver.
Go to the next.
If you have C's, you're an avoider.
And if you have these, you are a warrior, right?
We all deal with money in different ways.
Worry about it, we ignore it, hope it no go away, we save it, we spend it.
But statistically, we stress about it.
And, you know, in this series, we've been talking about going to the panic room.
Money can send us there, but there's a second part of the title of this series.
And it's, there is a way out.
And that's what I want us to talk about.
because I really believe that the Bible gives us a way out.
And I want us to look at a story Jesus shares in Mark chapter four, okay?
Mark chapter four.
Let's look at it.
Once again, Jesus began teaching, underline that word teaching by the lake shore.
A very large crowd soon gathered around him, so he got into a boat.
That way his voice would carry.
Then he sat in the boat while all the people remained on short.
Verse two, he taught them
There's that word again, by telling many stories in the form of parables, such as the one we're going to look at.
Now here's what I want you to see.
Mark chapter four, we could look at it in the context of anything you deal with.
We can look at it at money, we could look at it in relationships, parenting, business.
In other words, Jesus sat down and he's going to teach them.
Now,
What is this teaching about?
Well, he teaches them in order to fulfill a promise.
Now, what is the promise?
Spound in John 10, 10.
Look what it says.
My purpose, this is Jesus speaking, my purpose is to give them.
Now, who is them?
My purpose, Jesus says, I have come.
I'm here to give them.
Who is them?
You.
It's me.
Say that with me.
Me.
Who is them?
It is me.
Jesus says, I came to give me a, now read this out loud with me at all of our campuses.
A, rich.
I know this is good news, let's say it happy.
That's why Jesus came.
That is his promise to us.
Now here's the question.
How does he do that?
Because see, a lot of us don't have that.
You're here, you love Jesus, but if you were honest, you'd say, you know what?
I have a stressful and overwhelming life.
I have a financially struggling life, but I do not have a rich and satisfying life.
So how does Jesus fulfill this promise in our lives?
Before we look at how he does, let's talk about how he doesn't do it.
First of all, he doesn't zap us.
with a rich and satisfying life.
Now, you might watch some religious programs on television and get the idea that if you give this much money or if you do this or do that, that God will zap you.
And that's not what Scripture teaches.
You and I don't just walk along or hold up our hands and all of a sudden God-like lightning zaps us and we're like, oh, I'm rich and I'm satisfied.
You know, all of a sudden money has come from different.
No, he doesn't do that.
You won't find that in Scripture.
Does he do miracles?
Of course he does.
Does he bless?
And we're gonna talk about that.
But he doesn't zap us with a rich and satisfying life.
It's not there.
And he doesn't do you for you.
So how does he do it?
Well, he does it by what the Scripture said in those first two verses of Mark chapter four.
Remember what it said?
What was Jesus doing?
He was teaching.
So the way in which Jesus fulfills his promise of giving you and me a rich and satisfying life is that he teaches us principles that will lead to a rich and satisfying life.
In other words, if you and I will not just know but do the principles he teaches us, we will have a rich and satisfying life if God can be trusted.
If God keeps his word, if God
is faithful.
Now, the challenge is we live in a culture that says the opposite.
We live in a culture that says you and I are the victim.
The reason you don't have a rich and satisfying life is not your fault.
The culture tells us.
It's because of something that's happened on the outside that's made your life unfair.
It's because of your lack of education.
It's because of the parents you had.
It's because of something out there who has done something to you to either hurt you or keep you from having a rich and satisfying life.
Understand that's not what the Scripture teaches.
You know why?
Because God is all-powerful, all-knowing, and everywhere at one time.
And He's made a promise that every one of us, not some of us, but all of us can have a rich and satisfying life.
And there is nothing powerful enough to keep God from keeping His promise.
You and I may have had difficulties.
We may have have obstacles.
There may be challenges in our lives, but we are not the victim.
Why?
Because God is with us.
And therefore, we can be overcomers, not under the circumstances.
Now, with this idea of being the victim, we tend to think we're owed something.
Right?
I'm old, a rich and satisfying life.
I mean, you owe this to me.
My boss owes me.
I do this, this, and this.
Well, think about it.
God, in the Old Testament, you got Noah.
Remember, it rained for 40 days a night, and you have the ark.
God told Noah how to build the ark, and he was very specific.
This wide, you know, this tall.
God even protected Noah when he was in the ark.
Who built the ark?
No, it did.
No is the one that built the ark.
Now, what do you think would have happened if Noah would have waited for God to zap him?
If when God told him it was gonna rain, he would have said, I believe it, God, I love you, I trust you.
And then he looks over, you know, and he's like, God, I'm starting to see clouds.
Where's the ark?
I hear the thunder.
God, where's the ark?
What do you think God would have said?
He just said, you're gonna drown.
I promise to protect you, you are a righteous man, but I told you how to build.
You have to apply the principles.
And when Noah built or applied the principles and built the ark, he was protected, just as God said that he would.
And the same is true for you and I.
God will give you, please hear this.
God will give you a rich and satisfying life.
It's what His Word says.
I'm not saying that.
That's what we read.
Jesus died so that you could have it, but you have to apply the principles that he teaches.
That's what Mark chapter 4 is about.
Now, and again, let me just give you one other example before I move on here.
Matthew 633, seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, then what?
All these things will be given to you as well.
Seek first, what is the kingdom in his right to see?
Live these principles, and if you live these principles, then you will what?
You will find yourself in position to have and experience a rich and satisfying life.
It's just over and over again in scripture, we see this.
So here's what I want us to do.
Like I said, we could look at any principles.
We could look at principles about business.
We could look at principles about parenting.
We can have a rich and satisfying life in all those areas.
That's the promise if we'll apply the principles.
But there are two areas we struggle the most in.
In my 25, maybe even 30 years of pastoring, there are two areas, sex and money.
Those are the two areas in which we struggle the most to actually live out what the scripture says.
But the one we have greatest stress over is money.
And so I want us to talk about that.
And I think if living God's principles,
lead to a rich and satisfying life, then what's the next question?
What are God's principles concerning money?
Now, I've taught on this on several different occasions.
If the Bible has thousands of verses, all you gotta do is go to Google, type in Bible, and then type in the word money.
You'll be amazed at the number of times the scripture mentioned something about money.
I'm just gonna look at three, all right?
And I'm, this,
Well, let's just talk about them.
Number one, money doesn't satisfy.
Money doesn't satisfy.
Now, the interesting thing about these biblical principles is that they're not just experienced by those who are Christ followers.
They're also experienced by people who may not even believe there is a God.
Let me show you a couple of secular fellas who have discovered that money doesn't satisfy.
Watch this.
I had everything a man could want.
even then.
I was a millionaire.
I had beautiful women in my life.
I had cars, a house, an incredible, solid, old career, and a future.
And yet, on a daily basis, I wanted to commit suicide.
So to me, I had a real disillusionment awakening, kind of a revelation about
you know, the phoniness of material acquisition.
It just doesn't renew that even then it didn't work.
But there are a lot of people with tons of money who are unhappy because either they become a prisoner of their money, or they become so consumed with getting money that they don't allow time for happiness.
All right, so there's a couple of artists, musicians.
Jim Carrey, I put his quote in your outline.
I hope everybody can get rich and famous.
And we'll have everything they ever dreamed of.
So they will know that is not
The answer.
Now, again, the reason they've discovered this is because this is a biblical principle that is true, right?
And it's true because God says so in Ecclesiastes 5, 10, look at what it says.
Those who love money will read it out loud with me.
Never how meaningless to think that wealth brings true happiness.
Now here's the key.
The key is not to just, here's what James said.
Don't just be a hearer of the word, be a doer as well.
In other words, I think probably most of us would say, yeah, money can't bring happiness, but you just got a second job because you thought if you could live in a certain neighborhood, you'd be happy.
Or if you could send your kids to a certain school, they would be happy.
Or if you could drive a certain car, you would be happy.
In other words, I wanna challenge you a little bit today.
And I wanna challenge that yes, we know that in our minds, but that's not the principles we're living by.
We're working longer hours.
We're working more jobs.
And we've even said, if I could just make a little more money, everything would be okay.
The scripture says, it's just meaningless.
That's not true.
Hebrews 13.5, don't love money.
Be satisfied with what you have.
So money can't.
It can't satisfy us.
Here's the second principle, biblical principle about money.
Money isn't reliable.
Some of us believe that if we had enough money, we would be at peace.
We would be peaceful and secure.
We wouldn't have to worry or be anxious.
I had a flat tire.
I could pay for a new one.
If the kids get sick, I could take them to the doctor.
When they get old enough, I'll send them to college.
If the economy went crazy, I've got enough tucked away.
If I lose my job, I'll be okay.
But I want to, again, I want to show you this principle and introduce you to a gentleman that we met, because you guys, through Temple Centurions, that envelope,
You realize that we've helped build medical facilities, homes, schools, and churches in Syria, in Iraq, where people, but because of ISIS, have been just pushed out of their homes.
You've done that if you're a temple centurion.
But I want you to teach you to a man who is one of those who got pushed out of his home.
It was a millionaire.
It's a great place to live.
You know, sad story, but one of the things you notice is when he lost his money, the one thing he didn't lose is God's love.
And while money, you know, got up and walked away as a result of the war over there, it is the church, God's people that was there.
to care for Him.
Money's not reliable.
It tends to walk away.
And again, you know that, but you're not living that way.
You're telling yourself that if you could have just a little more, there'd just be a little more peace in your life.
There'd be a little less stress in your life.
I just want to remind you, nations don't have enough money.
I'm a kid of the 80s, and I remember the Soviet Union.
I remember going against them in the Olympics.
I remember the Cold War and the fear of nuclear weapons.
And I remember President Reagan standing in front of the Berlin Wall, telling Gorbachev, you know, tear down this wall.
And it eventually came down.
Why?
Did Reagan kick it over?
Did the Americans knock it over?
No, no.
You know why?
They say, ran out of money.
They couldn't feed their people.
So if
governments can run out of money.
If governments don't have enough money to provide security for their people, what makes you think you can get enough?
It's not reliable.
And that's exactly what the Scripture tells us.
In 1 Timothy chapter 6 verse 17, look what it says.
Teach those who are rich in this world.
Now, who are the rich in this world?
It's not quite as quick to jump on that one.
Because the truth is, okay, and you can
If I had the time, I got it all printed out, but I just don't have enough time.
So I encourage you to investigate it.
You are.
I can tell from looking at you and what you have, just with you, that you're in the top 20% when it comes to wealth in the world.
Now, I know you're like, Troy, come home with me and you'll find out that's not true.
But it is.
That's the bottom end.
At the bottom end, those of us who have the least that are here today, you're in the top 20%.
Most of you are much higher than that.
So when he's talking to the rich, even though you and I might not feel like the rich, I'm telling you, when Paul wrote this to Timothy, he couldn't imagine the kind of car you drive or the house you live in or the air condition or the food or the clothes.
So he's talking to me, okay?
He's talking to you.
He's talking to us.
Teach those who are rich in this world not to be proud and not, and here's the part I want you to see, not to trust in their money, which is so, what's the next word?
Unreliable.
The thing that you, again, I know you know this, but you are working, believing, trying to get enough money so you can feel secure.
The scripture just says, unreliable.
It cannot produce what you hope that it will.
And he tells us there, and I'm going to show you, he says, there are trust, those who are rich, should be in God, who does what?
He gives us what we need.
In other words, he is reliable.
And he tells us why it's unreliable in Matthew 6.
These are the words of Jesus.
Don't store up treasures here on earth where
them, Russ destroys them and thieves break in.
So he says, he's going to define it now.
He's going to say, no matter how much money you get, moths are still going to eat.
Moths, they didn't have raid when the scripture was written, okay?
So if you had curtains, you had moths.
If you had more than one set of clothes, you had moths.
If you had bedding, you had moths.
Most people didn't, but if you were wealthy, you
What is he saying?
He's saying there's a certain amount of loss that comes with having.
So if you have several pairs of clothes, you're going to have to wash them.
Some of them are going to get torn.
Some are going to face the storms.
All the things that you have, the more that you have, the more you have to figure in,
a certain amount of loss.
It's like when you buy a car today, if you were to buy a brand new car, drive it off the lot, can you sell it for what you bought it for?
No.
It depreciates.
You have to figure that in.
Well, that's what he's saying.
And you have to do that.
In other words, the more you have, the more you have to be thinking, how much do I really have?
Because this was here, this depreciated there, this was lost there.
And then he says, Russ destroys it.
So not only do you have to calculate, but you also have to maintain it.
You have to change the oil.
If you have a house, you have to paint it.
If you have shoes, you have to polish them.
The more shoes you have, the more you have to polish.
And then he says, thieves, right?
The more you have, the more you're worried somebody will steal it.
How many of you own something that you know nobody's ever going to steal it because it's not worth anything?
Some of you drive cars that you don't even have to lock.
But if you drive a Ferrari, you lock it.
And not only do you lock it, you're worried what?
Somebody will dent it.
The bigger your house, the better your secure system.
If you've got a giant house like some of those television stars, you have security people.
That's all he's saying.
You can't ever get enough.
You'll never have enough money to do.
And so you'll spend all your time doing what?
Taking care of what you have.
And so this is what I wrote in my notes.
When money is your attempt at peace and security, you won't have much of either.
You'll be rich with money, but you'll be poor in peace and security.
He tells us that in Psalm 33, the best equipped army cannot save a king, nor a great strength enough to save a warrior.
Don't count on your war horses to give you victory for all its strength that cannot save you.
Doesn't matter.
We have the biggest army in the world.
But that doesn't keep a lone person from blowing up them all.
The army can't protect you.
That's what the Scripture's saying.
And if you and I think we can get a big enough army that will protect us from every danger, it won't.
He says, no, the Lord is our hope.
He is our help.
He is our shield.
Doesn't mean those things are bad.
It just means those things can't provide what so many of us are working so hard in hope to the wood.
Security.
I won't have to worry if I just have enough.
Here's the third one.
Generosity experiences happiness.
In other words, happiness and joy are found in being generous.
Now, let's listen to the richest man in the world.
Well, it's the most fulfilling thing we've ever done.
And, you know, you can't take it with you, and if it's not good for your kids, you know, then let's get together in brainstorm about, you know, what can be done.
The world is a far better place because of the philanthropists of the past.
And the US tradition here, which is the strongest, is the envy of the world.
And part of the reason I'm so optimistic is because I do think philanthropy is going to grow and take some of these things.
Government's just not good at working on and discovering and shine some light in the right direction.
All right.
Do you know what's two things he said?
He said, generous people.
He said, philanthropists, but I can't say that word.
So I'm going to say, generous people.
All right.
of the past have done great things.
And he said that America is the envy of the world when it comes to generosity.
Well, why is that?
It's because of the Christian principles, the biblical principles our nation was founded on.
And let me prove it to you.
Who started the colleges and universities in our nation?
Who started the hospitals?
Who started the orphanages?
It's Christ followers.
It's the church.
No, they're not all Christ followers today.
Some of them have gone off into the secular world, but America is what it is because of that foundation, because of this principle.
This principle that true happiness and true satisfaction is found in generosity.
Let me show you what Jesus said.
You may not realize Jesus said this in Acts 20.
He says, and I have been a constant example
of how you can help those in need by working hard.
You should remember the words of the Lord Jesus.
It is, and let's just read this out loud together.
You ready?
It is more blessed.
Let's say it again.
It is more.
That's the principle.
It's more blessed to give than to receive.
Now, I want us to dive a little deeper because the Bible gets more specific than that.
Just as within the case of Noah, he didn't just say, build a boat.
He said, this big, he said, this kind of wood, he said, put pitch on the inside.
He is very, very specific in what the ark should look like.
And the Bible is very specific in what our generosity should look like.
Why?
Why does the Bible get specific about what generosity is?
So that we will not self
deceive.
The easiest thing in the world is to deceive yourself.
You're doing something that you're not.
That's why we can go on a diet and not lose weight.
If you've ever been on a diet and not lost weight, how does that happen?
Because you lie to yourself about what you're really eating.
You're like, oh, I didn't have anything today.
And you start adding it up.
You're like, oh, shoot.
That's why every good dietician is going to tell you what.
Write down what you eat.
Why?
Because you and I will lie to ourselves.
Well, that's why God says, I'm going to show you what generosity is.
Because it's the principle that will change your life.
You want a rich and satisfying life?
You got to know money can't do it.
You got to know money's not satisfying.
It's not reliable.
But generosity is the principle that leads to being rich and satisfied, rich and satisfied, abundant.
Some translations say live.
He says, so I don't want you to miss that because you've deceived yourself into believing you're living a principle that you're not.
So he gets very specific.
Proverbs 3, 9, the wisdom writer says, honor the Lord with your wealth.
and with your resources, and with the best part, or some translations say, first part of everything you produce.
So right off the bat, God says, I want you to honor, here's how you live generously, honor me with what I have given you.
And we're gonna give, I'm gonna give you three words that give us the details, okay?
Here are the three words as we dive into the specifics, kind of like the wood and the size of the arc.
The word first words, tithe, the second words, nudge, the third words, enjoy.
tithe, nudge, and enjoy.
Now, I've taught on these before, and so if you want to go deeper, you can go online or go to the bookstore, but there's lots of scriptures that talk about the tithe, but the one that is the clearest is Malachi 3, 7, 3, 10.
Let's read it in context of what we've learned so far.
He says, this is God speaking, every since the days of your ancestors,
And who is he speaking to?
God's people.
Those of you who are Christ followers, you have scorned my decrees and failed to obey them.
So what is he saying?
What's he saying?
He's saying, you are not living by my principles.
You've scorned them.
I've given you my principles, but you're not living by them.
Now,
God says, but I'm going to give you another opportunity because if you read Malachi or you read Haggai, here's what you'll find, okay?
In chapters one and two, I think in Haggai, maybe chapter six, it talks about how they put money in their pocket only to stick their hand in there and it be gone.
Money runs through their hand like sand.
that they eat, but they're still hungry.
They put on coats, but they're still cold.
They drink, but they're still thirsty.
Maybe you can relate to that.
You got a second job, but you don't have any more money.
You're just distressed, you're just as tired.
You got a promotion, but you're still struggling financially.
In other words, every time you take two steps forward, it's like you get pushed three steps backwards.
You just can't seem to make progress.
That's exactly what he's saying here.
He's saying, you have forgotten my principles.
And as a result, you are not living a rich and satisfying life.
Now, he doesn't leave us there.
He says, return to me.
And I will return to you, says the Lord of Heaven's armies.
And they respond the way you and I do.
But you ask, how can we return when we have never gone away?
You and I say, God, I love you.
Why am I struggling?
I go to church, I'm serving the, I changed three dirty diapers this weekend.
God, that's gotta mean something, right?
We say the same thing.
What are you talking about?
God not living your principles.
I do this and I do that and I do this.
He says, but you ask how it can return when we have never gone away.
Then he says, I'm gonna give you an example, verse eight.
Should people cheat God?
Yet you have cheated me."
What, what, what?
But you ask, what do you mean?
When did we ever cheat you?
And he tells them, you have cheated me of the tithe.
The word tithe means a tenth or 10%.
You have cheated me of the tithe and the offerings do me.
You are under a curse for your whole nation has been cheating me.
I mean, it just doesn't get clear in that.
He says, a reason you're not rich and satisfied.
The reason you don't have an abundant life is because you financially, now you could talk about marriage, you could talk about business, you could talk about parenting, those principles in that area.
But here we're talking about finances.
He says, why?
Why?
Because you're cheating me.
You're not returning to me the tithe that is one of my, one of my principles.
And therefore, you are
struggling.
You cheated me.
You're under a curse.
He says, but you don't have to stay there.
Look what he says in verse 10.
Bring what's the next word?
Don't fade out on me.
I know this is tough.
Bring what?
All the tenth, all the tithe into the store.
Circle the word all.
This is important.
Again, you can argue with me.
You don't have to do this.
This is, but I want you to least wrestle with it.
Because I just believe it.
He says, bring all.
He doesn't say bring some or bring most.
He says, bring all of the tenth.
Return to me the tithe.
Partial obedience is disobedience.
When I've got three children and when they were younger, and I would say, Tyler, come here.
And Tyler would take three steps towards me.
I wasn't happy about his three steps.
Why?
Because what did I tell him?
Come here.
Come into the living room.
Partial obedience is disobedience because it's about trust.
That's really what this is all about.
Do I believe that God's principles will actually lead to rich and satisfying life?
Bring all the ties into the storehouse so there'll be enough food in my temple.
The storehouse, the temple, the temple represented where God's people gathered.
It represented where God was.
If you were to go to the New Testament, God
resides in you and me.
We are as temple according to 1 Corinthians 6, but the church is where we gather together.
He's not talking about your grandmother here.
He's not talking about the guy on the side of the street.
He's not talking about helping your nephew go to college.
He's talking about returning the tithe to the local church.
That's what I believe.
That's what Stephanie and I practice.
If you do, if you live the principal,
What's the promise?
I will open the windows of heaven for you.
I will part a blessing so great you won't have enough room to take it in.
Try it.
God knew it would be tough for us.
Put me to the test.
All right.
So that's the tithe.
Secondly, we have the nudge.
Second Corinthians 9.
Don't give reluctantly or response to pressure for God.
Loves a person who gives cheerfully.
What's the nudge?
It's when you see the guy on the side of the road and the Holy Spirit just kind of taps you on the shoulder and says you need to help them.
It's temple sitarian.
It's helping send your niece to college.
It's helping your grandmother.
It's taking care of your parents.
It's not the tithe, it's the nudge.
The tithe has nothing to do with something you feel.
It has something to do with what God has said.
The nudge, on the other hand, is God moving your heart.
And when he does, you're either obedient or you're not.
And then the other word is the word, enjoy.
In other words, what is left after you've returned to God the tithe and you've been obedient when he nudges your heart.
Look what it says in verse 19.
Also, God gives wealth possessions and power to why.
What's that next word?
To do what?
To enjoy.
To enjoy those things.
The NLT translated, it's a good thing to receive wealth from God and good health to enjoy it.
God, it's just like you as a parent, what's the best part of Christmas?
What you get for Christmas are watching your kids open up something they wanted so badly.
Well, how much more does our Heavenly Father enjoy blessing you?
He does.
You say, well, Troy, I'm not being very, very blessed.
The question is, are you living the principles?
Have you ever asked yourself this question?
It comes up, I ask myself this question, do I have too much stuff?
How much is too much is a Christian?
Or maybe we could put it a different way.
Am I living generously?
Are you a generous person, am I a generous person, a biblically generous person?
Well, I think that's an easy question to answer.
Here's how you answer that question.
Are you returning to God a tenth of everything He's given you?
Are you obedient to the nudge?
When God taps you on the shoulder, do you help your knees or do you help your, whatever it is?
Are you obedient to return to God the tithe
the 10% of whatever he gives you, and are you obedient to the nudge?
If you say, yes, I do, then you're generous according to the Bible.
If you don't, you're not generous.
Say, Troy, that offends me.
I'm sorry, that's just what the scripture says.
You might be generous according to your neighbor.
You might be generous according to anyone, but you're not generous according to what the scripture has to say.
You know, that's what makes talking about money in church so difficult.
It's not really what does the church do with the money.
You can see.
You can see people's lives change, people fed.
It's the fact statistically 95 to 98% of us don't do those two things.
And do you ever like to be challenged on something you're not doing?
I mean, I don't.
You ever had somebody get up and talk about running?
I hate running.
And when somebody, oh, it's healthy, you ought to run.
It's like, you know what I tend to do?
My thing is to try to find something wrong with the person saying that.
So I can say, well, if you'd fix your blah, blah, then I'd do da, da.
That's why this is so difficult.
Now I want us to go back to our story, and this is where we're gonna end, okay?
And I'm gonna speed up, so listen quickly.
But this is important, because we're going back to Jesus' teaching principles.
He tells this story.
He says, listen, a farmer went out to plant some seed, and as he scattered it across his field, some of the seed fell on the footpath, and birds came and ate it.
Other seeds fell on the shallow soil with underlying rock.
The seeds sprouted quickly because of the soil was shallow.
But the plants soon withered under the hot sun.
And since, because it didn't have deep roots, it died.
Verse 7, Other seeds fell among the thorns and it grew up and choked out the tender plants so they produced no grain.
Still other seeds fell on fertile soil and they sprouted, grew and produced a crop
That was 30, 60, and even a hundred times as much as had been planted.
Now, what does that story mean?
What does it have to do with you?
Jesus says in verse nine, anyone who has ears, hear, anyone who has ears to hear should listen and apply, listen and understand.
Now, verse 10, later,
When Jesus was alone with His 12 disciples and the others who gathered around, they looked at Jesus and said, what in the world does that mean?
What does that story have to do with us?
They didn't get it anymore than you and I do.
So Jesus explains it.
This is the part I want you to see.
Verse 14, the farmer plants seed, taking God's word to others.
That's what we have just done for the last 10 minutes.
I have taken God's word, God's principles about money.
Could have done it about dating.
I could have done it about in any area of our lives.
That's what the scripture's for.
But I've taken it in an area of money and I've thrown that truth out.
Not my truth, but the biblical truth.
I've thrown that out.
That's what he says.
He says he interprets this story.
The farmer plants sea taking God's word to others.
So you and I are the ground.
The seed is the truth.
Right?
And his word or me in this case is the farmer.
I'm throwing that truth out.
Here's how you have a rich and satisfying life.
Now, what happens to it in your life and in my life?
We're gonna leave it in few moments.
Is your life, is my life gonna be transformed into rich and satisfying?
Or a year from now, are you gonna be just as stressed about money as you are today?
Well, look at what happens to it.
Number one, success is stolen.
And when I say success, here's what I mean.
The truth, the principles to a rich and satisfying life.
They're stolen.
That's what the Scripture says.
Look, verse 15, he's explaining this story.
The seed that fell on the footpath represents those that hear the message only to have Satan come at once and take it away.
Satan steals it.
In other words, you're here and you hear what I said a few moments ago.
You read the Scriptures.
but you'll never think about it again.
It doesn't penetrate your heart or your mind at all.
Well, how does the enemy steal it?
He lies.
The moment I throw out the seed, the moment we start reading God's word, the enemy whispers in our ear and he's like, that's not true.
I saw an article on Google that said, you know, and, you know, remember, it's a lie.
And then he goes a step further and he'll say this, he'll say, well, okay, maybe it's true, but it's not true for you.
I mean, God's not talking, he understands, you're going through a difficult time.
He understands, yeah, it's true, we're supposed to be generous and yeah, it would be good if we tithe, but God understands, he's not talking, you can't afford it.
You can't afford to help the guy in the size.
You can't afford to return to God 10% of everything He gives you.
You're struggling just to make your car payment.
I want to challenge you, okay?
I want to challenge you on that because I don't believe that's true.
I want you to look at the shoes you're wearing and I want to ask a question.
Do they make cheaper ones than the one you're wearing?
Do they make cheaper shirts than the one you have on?
Do they make a cheaper car than the one you drive?
Do they make a cheaper house than the one you live in?
I don't say that, Judge Minley, I just want you to understand that it's not you can't afford to live God's principles.
It's you have chosen not to live God's principles.
It's a priority decision and you can make it.
It's yours.
You do what you want.
I'm not judging you.
Listen, I believe
that you do not have to live a stressful, overwhelming, scared to death, financial life.
And I don't want you to miss it because you lied to yourself.
If you don't believe me, you don't believe the word, that's fine.
But I don't want you to miss it because the enemy steals it.
The second one, success is doubted, right?
Success is doubted.
Mark chapter four.
And again, when I say success, I'm talking about truth.
I'm talking about the principles for rich and satisfying life.
We begin to doubt.
Isn't that really true?
Can't look what he says.
Jesus' words.
The seed on the rocky soil represents those who hear the message.
They receive it with joy, but since they don't have deep roots, they don't last long.
They fall away as soon as they have a problem or are persecuted for believing God's word.
So you hear
the truth.
You heard what the Scripture said a few moments ago when it comes to money.
And you're like, yeah, I believe that.
I believe I can have a rich and satisfying life.
And I believe I can do it.
I can return to God.
I know it won't satisfy me.
I know it's not reliable.
And I'm going to be generous according to the Scripture.
And you do for two weeks, man, you make $100, you give, return to God 10.
And God nudges your heart to help the person in line at Starbucks and you help them out.
But then you get a flat tire or the car's kids get sick and things get financially tight.
You get under pressure.
That's what it says.
You get persecuted.
And what happens?
What does this scripture say?
Our roots,
Don't go very deep, so we doubt.
And what is doubt?
Doubt is the enemy of faith, right?
And when we doubt, what happens is we're like, ah, well, God, we go back to what we used to, God understands I can't this week, I will next week, or I can't now, I will later.
And you know that was you, it dried up.
You say, I've tried this in the past, Troy, it didn't work.
No, it's not that it didn't work.
It's at what?
Our roots didn't go deep enough.
How, when our roots go deep, our faith is fed.
How do we feed our faith?
Well, according again to the scripture, one of the ways we do it is by hanging out with God.
Praying, talking to God, reading His word 10, 15 minutes a day, consistently.
That's why I talk about it.
I don't get paid according to how much Bible you read.
I talk about reading the Bible because it will feed your faith because you will be persecuted financially.
And what I mean is you're going to go through times when it is financially tight and tough.
How else do we grow our faith by being faithful to his house?
You didn't come up with church.
I didn't come up with church.
God did in His Word that we are to gather together.
Why?
So your faith will be fed so that when you are tempted or when you doubt the principles, you won't stop living them.
So as to not have a rich and satisfying life, you know, Steph and I have been through a lot in our lives.
I've had encephalitis, didn't know who I was.
I've had
Bell's palsy where my face drops down.
I've had stents put in my heart.
I mean, we know what it's like to take wick, to get milk for Tyler, to take, have Raymond Noodles because, you know, going down to Exxon is all we can afford.
But through all those things, we had a deep faith to trust God and say, God, we're going to keep trusting you.
And he took care of us through those things.
Even in the midst of those things, we were able to have a rich, hopeful, peaceful life.
But about 2007, 2008, several things happened.
One is my heart started giving me trouble, and I had stents put in.
Now for 20 years, the 20 years before that, I had gotten up at five o'clock every morning, or let's say five, six days a week.
And I'd hung out with God, and then I had been at the gym by 6 a.m.
I was very careful about what I ate.
It didn't seem right that I would be the one with blockage in my arteries.
Also, when we moved here, we prayed for friends because we didn't know anybody.
And God gave us some friends.
One couple we got very close with for 10 years.
And then they left the church in a very hurtful situation.
I didn't understand it.
I still hurt today over that situation.
There was an opportunity.
You know, from the time I was in college, I read a book a week, I listened to conferences, I sacrificed to go to a conference.
I did everything I knew to do to grow professionally.
And there was this one opportunity that I really wanted and it didn't happen.
And it was usually discouraging to me.
And if you remember, 2007, 2008 was also when the financial crisis hit.
And our mission here of launching churches and campuses got incredibly difficult.
The financial struggle, even to this day, has been incredibly challenging, which is difficult.
Well, all those other things never impacted my doubt.
This did.
It's like, man, are the principles true?
Can you trust it?
If you do this, this, I mean, if I live what God says I live, will He keep His word to me?
Will He keep His promise to me?
Now, I'm thankful for all those years of building deep roots so that while that doubt was around the edges of our lives, we didn't surrender to it.
But we all have to face it.
That's why I plead with you.
That's why I challenge you to be committed in those areas of your life.
Let me give you these last two.
Jesus says success is not prioritized.
In verses 18 and 19, he says, the seed that fell among the thorns represent others who hear God's word, but all too quickly the message is crowded out by the worries of life, the lure of wealth.
the desire of other things.
So no fruit is produced.
This is not the roots.
This is the thorns.
This is once you get a blessing.
You start your own company, you start making money.
And you know what the thorns are?
What does it say?
You want more.
And now you have this wrestle within yourself.
You like this blessing and you want more of it.
So you start to desire it and your desire for more crowds out what?
Chokes out what?
Your willingness to lift the principles.
My blessing can be dangerous.
Did you know the more money somebody makes, the less generous they are?
Percentage wise?
The more God blesses somebody, the more they hang on to.
See, they say things like this, why?
I'm giving more than most people, dollar amount.
But God's not concerned about the dollar amount.
He didn't give us principles with the dollar amount.
You won't find it anywhere in scripture.
He gave us, percentage why?
Because he's after our heart.
Last one.
And this is the one I want for you.
I want it for me and I want it for our church.
And I don't know any other way of you and me and our church experiencing this than to live His principles.
Look what it says.
And the seed, the truth.
Those principles fell on good soil, represents those who hear and accept God's work, and produces a harvest of 30, 60, and even a hundred times as much as been planted.
That's what God wants for you.
but ultimately you have to make the choice, don't you?
We all do.
We all have to do something with the seed that gets thrown onto our heart.
Let me pray for us.
Father, I pray that you'd be with us.
And I pray, God, I pray that we would all experience a rich and satisfying life, that we'd be able to trust your word and your character and your faithfulness.
Ask it in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Let's give God a hand.
Can we do that?
All right.
I'm gonna ask our ushers to come.
Gonna have an opportunity, I guess.
You might say, to apply.
The coach in me is always gonna give you an opportunity to respond to whatever we have learned, or at least whatever we've talked about.
Let me pray for our giving.
God, it's so easy to know things that are hard to do.
And whether it be in our business life or our parenting life, our married life, in this case, our financial life, the enemy's good at what he does.
Help us to have faith in you.
I pray God for everyone here.
I pray for those who are struggling the most, who have
who have this great weight on them, who love you and wanna please you, but scary.
All the only place I know to turn is to your word, and I just ask that you would do in their lives what you had promised to do.
When we're weak, you are strong.
Your grace is sufficient.
That's what your word says, and that's what we trust in Jesus' name.
Let's give together, all right, as we worship.